SAML Assertions Notes

SAML -> Security Assertion Markup Language

Is an XML based framework that allows identity and security information to be shared across security domains.

SAML spec was primarily designed for cross domain web browser SSO, is extensible

An assertion in this framework is an XML Security token

In OAuth, an authorization grant is an abstract term used to describe intermediate creds that represent the resource owner’s authorization.

This RFC heavily reuses formatting and processing rules defined in the SAML profiles (OASIS.SAML-PROFILES-2.0-is).

For third party authorization, this RFC expresses how to do that without

Parameters to pass for OAuth:

grant_type -> urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:saml2- bearer
assertion -> SAML assertion (base64 url encoded)
scope -> optional

Mandatory Assertion Validation Criteria:
The assertion’s issuer element must contain a unique identifier for the entity that defined the assertion
The intended audience must be signaled amongst the following XPath.
conditions.audienceRestriction.audience
The assertion must contain a subject identifying the principal
The assertion must have an expiry field denoting the expiration time
Must have a header attribute somewhere, as well as the endpoint of the authorization server
Authorization server must reject the the entire assertion if it has expired, or can reject it if the expiration time is unreasonably far in the future.
If the assertion issuer directly authenticated the subject, the assertion should contain an AuthnStatement.
Other statements (such as ) May be included in the assertion.
The assertion must be digitally signed, or have a MAC Message Authentication Code)
Encrypted elements may appear in place of their plaintext counterparts
Authorization Server must reject an assertion that fails other validation criteria associated with the OASIS SAML profile

OASIS is a non-profit consortium that drives the development, convergence and adoption of open standards for the global information society.

Subject Confirmation or NameID elements identify the principal?

If the assertion fails validation, the authorization server must return an error response. The error field should read “invalid_grant”

Security considerations for this RFC are listed in the original OAuth 2.0 RFC, the assertion framework extension for OAuth 2.0, a document by OASIS on security considerations for SAML.

The following items need to align to ensure interoperability:
Issuer and Audience identifiers,
The location of the token endpoint
The keys used to apply and identify digital signatures of assertions
One time use restrictions
Maximum assertion lifetime
Specific subject and attribute requirements.
AuthN -> Authentication
AuthZ -> Authorization
TTL -> Time To Live